# Test Suite for Intrinsic Utility: wait

This test suite covers the **wait** intrinsic utility
as specified by POSIX.1-2024 (Section 1.7).

## Table of contents

- [utility: wait](#utility-wait)

## utility: wait

#### NAME

> wait — await process completion

#### SYNOPSIS

> `wait [pid...]`

#### DESCRIPTION

> The *wait* utility shall wait for one or more child processes whose process IDs are known in the current shell execution environment (see [*2.13 Shell Execution Environment*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap02.md#213-shell-execution-environment)) to terminate.
>
> If the *wait* utility is invoked with no operands, it shall wait until all process IDs known to the invoking shell have terminated and exit with a zero exit status.
>
> If one or more *pid* operands are specified that represent known process IDs, the *wait* utility shall wait until all of them have terminated. If one or more *pid* operands are specified that represent unknown process IDs, *wait* shall treat them as if they were known process IDs that exited with exit status 127. The exit status returned by the *wait* utility shall be the exit status of the process requested by the last *pid* operand.
>
> Once a process ID that is known in the current shell execution environment (see [*2.13 Shell Execution Environment*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap02.md#213-shell-execution-environment)) has been successfully waited for, it shall be removed from the list of process IDs that are known in the current shell execution environment. If the process ID is associated with a background job, the corresponding job shall also be removed from the list of background jobs.

#### OPTIONS

> None.

#### OPERANDS

> The following operand shall be supported:
>
> - *pid*: One of the following:
>
>     1. The unsigned decimal integer process ID of a child process whose termination the utility is to wait for.
>     2. A job ID (see XBD [*3.182 Job ID*](docs/posix/md/basedefs/V1_chap03.md#3182-job-id)) that identifies a process group in the case of a job-control background job, or a process ID in the case of a non-job-control background job (if supported), to be waited for. The job ID notation is applicable only for invocations of *wait* in the current shell execution environment; see [*2.13 Shell Execution Environment*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap02.md#213-shell-execution-environment). The exit status of *wait* shall be determined by the exit status of the last pipeline to be executed.
>       **Note:** The job ID type of *pid* is only available on systems supporting the User Portability Utilities option or supporting non-job-control background jobs.

#### STDIN

> Not used.

#### INPUT FILES

> None.

#### ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

> The following environment variables shall affect the execution of *wait*:
>
> - *LANG*: Provide a default value for the internationalization variables that are unset or null. (See XBD [*8.2 Internationalization Variables*](docs/posix/md/basedefs/V1_chap08.md#82-internationalization-variables) for the precedence of internationalization variables used to determine the values of locale categories.)
> - *LC_ALL*: If set to a non-empty string value, override the values of all the other internationalization variables.
> - *LC_CTYPE*: Determine the locale for the interpretation of sequences of bytes of text data as characters (for example, single-byte as opposed to multi-byte characters in arguments).
> - *LC_MESSAGES*: Determine the locale that should be used to affect the format and contents of diagnostic messages written to standard error.
> - *NLSPATH*: Determine the location of messages objects and message catalogs.

#### ASYNCHRONOUS EVENTS

> Default.

#### STDOUT

> Not used.

#### STDERR

> The standard error shall be used only for diagnostic messages.

#### OUTPUT FILES

> None.

#### EXTENDED DESCRIPTION

> None.

#### EXIT STATUS

> If one or more operands were specified, all of them have terminated or were not known in the invoking shell execution environment, and the status of the last operand specified is known, then the exit status of *wait* shall be the status of the last operand specified. If the process terminated abnormally due to the receipt of a signal, the exit status shall be greater than 128 and shall be distinct from the exit status generated by other signals, but the exact value is unspecified. (See the [*kill*](docs/posix/md/utilities/kill.md) **-l** option.) Otherwise, the *wait* utility shall exit with one of the following values:
>
> - 0: The *wait* utility was invoked with no operands and all process IDs known by the invoking shell have terminated.
> - 1-126: The *wait* utility detected an error.
> - 127: The process ID specified by the last *pid* operand specified is not known in the invoking shell execution environment.

#### CONSEQUENCES OF ERRORS

> Default.

---

*The following sections are informative.*

#### APPLICATION USAGE

> This utility is required to be intrinsic. See [*1.7 Intrinsic Utilities*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap01.md#17-intrinsic-utilities) for details.
>
> On most implementations, *wait* is a shell built-in. If it is called in a subshell or separate utility execution environment, such as one of the following:
>
> ```
> (wait)
> nohup wait ...
> find . -exec wait ... \;
> ```
>
> it returns immediately because there are no known process IDs to wait for in those environments.
>
> The use of job ID notation is not dependent on job control being enabled. When job control has been disabled using [*set*](docs/posix/md/utilities/set.md) **+m**, *wait* can still be used to wait for the process group associated with a job-control background job, or the process ID associated with a non-control background job (if supported), using
>
> ```
> wait %<background job number>
> ```
>
> See also the RATIONALE for [*jobs*](docs/posix/md/utilities/jobs.md) and [*kill*](docs/posix/md/utilities/kill.md).
>
> The shell is allowed to discard the status of any process if it determines that the application cannot get the process ID for that process from the shell. It is also required to remember only {CHILD_MAX} number of processes in this way. Since the only way to get the process ID from the shell is by using the `'!'` shell parameter, the shell is allowed to discard the status of an asynchronous AND-OR list if `"$!"` was not referenced before another asynchronous AND-OR list was started. (This means that the shell only has to keep the status of the last asynchronous AND-OR list started if the application did not reference `"$!"`. If the implementation of the shell is smart enough to determine that a reference to `"$!"` was not saved anywhere that the application can retrieve it later, it can use this information to trim the list of saved information. Note also that a successful call to *wait* with no operands discards the exit status of all asynchronous AND-OR lists.)
>
> If the exit status of *wait* is greater than 128, there is no way for the application to know if the waited-for process exited with that value or was killed by a signal. Since most utilities exit with small values, there is seldom any ambiguity. Even in the ambiguous cases, most applications just need to know that the asynchronous job failed; it does not matter whether it detected an error and failed or was killed and did not complete its job normally.
>
> Some historical shells returned from wait when a process stops instead of only when it terminates. This standard does not allow wait to return when a process stops for two reasons:
>
> 1. The vast majority, if not all, shell scripts that use *wait* (without using an extension) expect it not to return until the process terminates.
> 2. It is not possible to write a portable shell script that can correctly handle *wait* returning when a process stops, because an exit status indicating a process was stopped by a signal cannot be distinguished from one indicating that the process called [*exit*()](docs/posix/md/functions/exit.md) with the same value.
>
> The standard developers considered allowing interactive shells to return from *wait* when a process stops, since the interactive user would see a message which would allow them to tell whether the process stopped or terminated. However, they decided that it would be inadvisable to introduce an inconsistency between interactive and non-interactive shells, particularly as the most likely use of *wait* in an interactive shell is to try out commands before putting them in a shell script. Implementations can provide an extension that could be used to request that *wait* returns when a process stops. It is recommended that any such extension uses a different method of returning information about the wait status of the process so that the information can be unambiguous. One suitable method would be an option that takes a variable name as an option-argument. The named variable would be set to a numeric value and the exit status of wait would indicate whether this value is an exit value or a signal number, and whether the signal terminated the process or stopped it. Such an extension would also provide a way for shell scripts to obtain the full exit value (as would be returned by [*waitid*()](docs/posix/md/functions/waitid.md)).

#### EXAMPLES

> Although the exact value used when a process is terminated by a signal is unspecified, if it is known that a signal terminated a process, a script can still reliably determine which signal by using [*kill*](docs/posix/md/utilities/kill.md) as shown by the following script:
>
> ```
> sleep 1000&
> pid=$!
> kill -kill $pid
> wait $pid
> echo $pid was terminated by a SIG$(kill -l $?) signal.
> ```
>
> If the following sequence of commands is run in less than 31 seconds:
>
> ```
> sleep 257 | sleep 31 &
> jobs -l %%
> ```
>
> either of the following commands returns the exit status of the second [*sleep*](docs/posix/md/utilities/sleep.md) in the pipeline:
>
> ```
> wait <pid of sleep 31>
> wait %%
> ```

#### RATIONALE

> The description of *wait* does not refer to the [*waitpid*()](docs/posix/md/functions/waitpid.md) function from the System Interfaces volume of POSIX.1-2024 because that would needlessly overspecify this interface. However, the wording means that *wait* is required to wait for an explicit process when it is given an argument so that the status information of other processes is not consumed. Historical implementations use the [*wait*()](docs/posix/md/functions/wait.md) function defined in the System Interfaces volume of POSIX.1-2024 until [*wait*()](docs/posix/md/functions/wait.md) returns the requested process ID or finds that the requested process does not exist. Because this means that a shell script could not reliably get the status of all background children if a second background job was ever started before the first job finished, it is recommended that the *wait* utility use a method such as the functionality provided by the [*waitpid*()](docs/posix/md/functions/waitpid.md) function.
>
> The ability to wait for multiple *pid* operands was adopted from the KornShell.
>
> This new functionality was added because it is needed to determine the exit status of any asynchronous AND-OR list accurately. The only compatibility problem that this change creates is for a script like
>
> ```
> while sleep 60 do
>     job& echo Job started $(date) as $!  done
> ```
>
> which causes the shell to monitor all of the jobs started until the script terminates or runs out of memory. This would not be a problem if the loop did not reference `"$!"` or if the script would occasionally *wait* for jobs it started.

#### FUTURE DIRECTIONS

> A future version of this standard may add an option which takes a variable name as an option-argument, allowing *wait* to return information about the wait status of a process in an unambiguous way.

#### SEE ALSO

> [*2. Shell Command Language*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap02.md#2-shell-command-language), [*kill*](docs/posix/md/utilities/kill.md#tag_20_64), [*sh*](docs/posix/md/utilities/sh.md)
>
> XBD [*3.182 Job ID*](docs/posix/md/basedefs/V1_chap03.md#3182-job-id), [*8. Environment Variables*](docs/posix/md/basedefs/V1_chap08.md#8-environment-variables)
>
> XSH [*wait*()](docs/posix/md/functions/wait.md#tag_17_658)

#### CHANGE HISTORY

> First released in Issue 2.

#### Issue 8

> Austin Group Defect 854 is applied, adding a note to the APPLICATION USAGE section that this utility is required to be intrinsic.
>
> Austin Group Defect 1122 is applied, changing the description of *NLSPATH .*
>
> Austin Group Defect 1254 is applied, updating various requirements for the [*jobs*](docs/posix/md/utilities/jobs.md) utility to account for the addition of [*2.11 Job Control*](docs/posix/md/utilities/V3_chap02.md#211-job-control).

*End of informative text.*

### Tests

#### Test: wait with no operands exits 0 when all finish

`wait` with no operands waits for all background jobs and returns 0
if they all succeed.

```
begin test "wait with no operands exits 0 when all finish"
  script
    true &
    true &
    wait
  expect
    stdout ""
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait with no operands exits 0 when all finish"
```

#### Test: wait for a single PID

`wait` with a PID operand waits for that specific process and
returns its exit status.

```
begin test "wait for a single PID"
  script
    (exit 42) &
    pid=$!
    wait $pid
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "42"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait for a single PID"
```

#### Test: unknown PID returns 127

`wait` returns 127 for a PID that is not a known child process.

```
begin test "unknown PID returns 127"
  script
    wait 99999999 2>/dev/null
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "127"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "unknown PID returns 127"
```

#### Test: wait blocks until child is finished

`wait` blocks execution until the background job completes.

```
begin test "wait blocks until child is finished"
  script
    (sleep 1; echo "done" > tmp_wait_test) &
    pid=$!
    wait $pid
    cat tmp_wait_test
  expect
    stdout "done"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait blocks until child is finished"
```

#### Test: all background jobs finish normally: wait exits 0

When `wait` is invoked with no operands, it waits until all known background process IDs have terminated and then exits with status 0.

```
begin test "all background jobs finish normally: wait exits 0"
  script
    true & true & wait
  expect
    stdout ""
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "all background jobs finish normally: wait exits 0"
```

#### Test: single background job finishes: wait exits 0

A single background job (`sleep 0.1`) is started and then `wait` (no operands) is called. It must block until the job completes and exit 0.

```
begin test "single background job finishes: wait exits 0"
  script
    sleep 0.1 & wait
  expect
    stdout ""
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "single background job finishes: wait exits 0"
```

#### Test: background job writes file; after wait file must exist

`wait` must block until the background job actually finishes. A background job that writes a file after a short delay is started; after `wait` returns, the file must exist and contain the expected content.

```
begin test "background job writes file; after wait file must exist"
  script
    rm -f /tmp/_wait_test_$$
    (sleep 0.2; echo done > /tmp/_wait_test_$$) & wait
    cat /tmp/_wait_test_$$
    rm -f /tmp/_wait_test_$$
  expect
    stdout "done"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "background job writes file; after wait file must exist"
```

#### Test: wait actually blocks until child is finished

This verifies that `wait` genuinely blocks the shell (at least 1 second here) rather than returning immediately, by measuring elapsed wall-clock time around a `sleep 1 &` followed by `wait`.

```
begin test "wait actually blocks until child is finished"
  script
    start=$(date +%s)
    sleep 1 & wait
    end=$(date +%s)
    elapsed=$((end - start))
    [ "$elapsed" -ge 1 ] && echo blocked
  expect
    stdout "blocked"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait actually blocks until child is finished"
```

#### Test: wait for two PIDs

`wait` accepts multiple PID operands and must wait for all of them to terminate before returning. Both background jobs must be finished when `wait` completes.

```
begin test "wait for two PIDs"
  script
    sleep 0.1 & p1=$!
    sleep 0.2 & p2=$!
    wait $p1 $p2
    echo "both_done"
  expect
    stdout "both_done"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait for two PIDs"
```

#### Test: second wait on same PID returns 127

Once a process ID has been successfully waited for, it is removed from the shell's known-PID list. A second `wait` on the same PID must therefore treat it as unknown and return exit status 127.

```
begin test "second wait on same PID returns 127"
  script
    sleep 0.1 & p=$!
    wait $p
    wait $p
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "127"
    stderr ".+"
    exit_code 0
end test "second wait on same PID returns 127"
```

#### Test: wait with no operands after failing background pipeline

When `wait` is invoked with no operands, it waits for all known processes and exits 0 regardless of whether any background job failed. The exit status of individual jobs does not affect the no-operand `wait` exit status.

```
begin test "wait with no operands after failing background pipeline"
  script
    (exit 3) & wait
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "0"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait with no operands after failing background pipeline"
```

#### Test: wait after all background jobs succeed

After all background jobs succeed, `wait` with no operands exits 0 and `$?` reflects that zero exit status.

```
begin test "wait after all background jobs succeed"
  script
    true & true & wait
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "0"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait after all background jobs succeed"
```

#### Test: single operand: wait returns that process exit status

When `wait` is given a single PID operand, its exit status must be the exit status of that process. Here the child exits 42, so `wait` must also return 42.

```
begin test "single operand: wait returns that process exit status"
  script
    (exit 42) & p=$!
    wait $p
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "42"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "single operand: wait returns that process exit status"
```

#### Test: multiple operands: wait returns exit status of last

When multiple PID operands are given, `wait` returns the exit status of the process specified by the last operand. Here the last child exits 13, so `wait` must return 13.

```
begin test "multiple operands: wait returns exit status of last"
  script
    (exit 7) & p1=$!
    (exit 13) & p2=$!
    wait $p1 $p2
    echo $?
  expect
    stdout "13"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "multiple operands: wait returns exit status of last"
```

#### Test: signal death >128 with no-operand wait

If a process is terminated by a signal, its exit status as reported by `wait` must be greater than 128. This kills a background process with SIGTERM and checks that the resulting status exceeds 128.

```
begin test "signal death >128 with no-operand wait"
  script
    sleep 60 & p=$!
    kill -TERM $p
    wait $p 2>/dev/null
    rc=$?
    [ "$rc" -gt 128 ] && echo no_op_sig_ok
  expect
    stdout "no_op_sig_ok"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "signal death >128 with no-operand wait"
```

#### Test: wait -l 143 prints TERM signal name

`kill -l 143` (128 + SIGTERM's number 15) must print a string identifying the TERM signal. This helps scripts determine which signal caused a process to exit with status > 128.

```
begin test "wait -l 143 prints TERM signal name"
  script
    kill -l 143
  expect
    stdout ".*(TERM|Term|term).*"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait -l 143 prints TERM signal name"
```

#### Test: wait -l 137 prints KILL signal name

A process killed by SIGKILL should produce a `wait` exit status greater than 128. This sends SIGKILL to a background job and verifies the resulting exit code exceeds 128.

```
begin test "wait -l 137 prints KILL signal name"
  script
    sleep 5 & p=$!
    kill -KILL "$p"
    wait "$p" 2>/dev/null
    rc=$?
    [ "$rc" -gt 128 ] && echo sigkill_ok
  expect
    stdout "sigkill_ok"
    stderr ""
    exit_code 0
end test "wait -l 137 prints KILL signal name"
```

#### Test: wait for unknown pid exits 127

POSIX specifies that `wait` exits 127 when the given PID is not known in the invoking shell's execution environment. This uses a PID that was never started as a background job.

```
begin test "wait for unknown pid exits 127"
  script
    wait 999999
    exit $?
  expect
    stdout ""
    stderr ".+"
    exit_code 127
end test "wait for unknown pid exits 127"
```

#### Test: waited job removed from jobs list

Verifies that once a background job has been successfully waited for, it is removed from the shell's background jobs list. After `wait` completes, `jobs` should produce no output for that job, as POSIX requires.

```
begin interactive test "waited job removed from jobs list"
  spawn -i
  expect "$ "
  send "set -m"
  expect "$ "
  send "sleep 0.1 &"
  expect "$ "
  sleep 500ms
  send "wait; jobs; echo end_of_jobs"
  expect "end_of_jobs"
  sendeof
  wait
end interactive test "waited job removed from jobs list"
```
